Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi (commonly known as IIT (BHU), Varanasi) is a public engineering institution located in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Founded in 1919 as the Banaras Engineering College, it became the Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University in 1968. It was designated an Indian Institute of Technology in 2012.[2][3] IIT (BHU), Varanasi has 13 departments and three inter-disciplinary schools.
History
IIT (BHU), Varanasi has formerly been known as the Banaras Engineering College (BENCO), the College of Mining and Metallurgy (MINMET), the College of Technology (TECHNO) and the Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University (IT-BHU). Its establishment is intimately linked with that of the Banaras Hindu University (BHU). The first convocation ceremony at BHU was held on 19 January 1919. The Chancellor of the University, Maharaja Krishnaraja Wadiyar of Mysore who had come to preside over and address the convocation, performed the opening ceremony of the Banaras Engineering College (BENCO) Workshop buildings.[4] An Artisan Course was started on 11 February 1919. BHU has the credit of first starting degree classes in mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, metallurgy and Pharmaceutics, thanks to the foresight of its founder, Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya.

The Department of Geology was started under BENCO in 1920. Courses in Mining and Metallurgy were introduced by the Geology Department. The Department of Industrial Chemistry was started in July 1921. In 1923, Mining and Metallurgy was established as a separate department and in 1944 it was raised to the status of a college forming the College of Mining and Metallurgy (MINMET).[4]

BHU was the first Indian university to introduce the study of Pharmaceutical Chemistry.[4] This initiative was taken in 1932 when a new group of subjects for the B.Sc. Examination consisting of (a) Chemistry, (b) Botany with Pharmacognosy and (c) Pharmaceutical Studies was started in 1934 and in 1935 a new three-year program leading to the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy was introduced. The science departments of the University were under the Central Hindu College. In September 1935, a new College of Science was constituted comprising the departments of Physics, Chemistry, Botany, Zoology, Geology, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Industrial Chemistry and Ceramics. In 1937, the Department of Glass Technology also came into existence under this college. The year 1939 witnessed the establishment of a separate College of Technology (TECHNO) comprising the departments of Industrial Chemistry, Pharmaceutics, Ceramics and Glass Technology.[4]

In 1968, BENCO, TECHNO and MINMET were merged into one and the Institute of Technology (IT-BHU) was established integrating the departments of Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Civil and Municipal Engineering, Mining Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Technology, Silicate Technology and Pharmaceutics. The Department of Silicate Technology subsequently became the Department of Ceramic Engineering. A separate Department of Electronics Engineering was also established.[4] The departments of Applied Physics, Applied Mathematics and Applied Chemistry were established in 1985.

The earlier system of regional admission based on merit lists was replaced in 1972 by admission through Indian Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Examination (IIT-JEE) for undergraduate courses and Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) for postgraduate courses. In the tenth meeting of IIT Council in 1972, it was also proposed to convert the then IT-BHU into an IIT and a committee was appointed by IIT Council for the same but because of political reasons, the desired conversion could not be achieved then.[5]

In 2003, Committees constituted by MHRD (Professors Joshi and Anand Krishnan Committees)[6] had recommended for the conversion of the Institute into an Indian Institute of Technology (IIT).[7] On 17 July 2008, the government of India issued a press release granting "In principle approval for taking over the Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University – a constituent unit of the Banaras Hindu University, a Central University, its conversion into an Indian Institute of Technology and integrating it with the IIT system in the country."[8] The BHU Executive Council approved the proposal of the HRD ministry to convert IT-BHU to IIT (BHU), Varanasi, retaining academic and administrative ties to BHU.

On 4 August 2010 a bill seeking to amend the Institutes of Technology Act 1961 to declare IT-BHU an IIT was introduced in the Lok Sabha by Minister of State for HRD, D. Purandeswari.[9][10][11] The Lok Sabha passed The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2011 on 24 March 2011[12] and the Rajya Sabha on 30 April 2012, thereby formalizing the IIT status of the Institute.[13] The Bill was signed by the President of India on 20 June 2012 and notified in the gazette on 21 June[14]

Campus
Hostel facilities

Limbdi Hostel
IIT (BHU), Varanasi has a residential and co-educational campus built on an area of 400 acres (1.6 km2) within the larger BHU campus which is spread over nearly 1,300 acres (5.3 km2) at the southern end of Varanasi on the banks of the River Ganges.

There are 17 hostels for students, 12 for boys, 4 for girls and 1 for married couples.

Medical facilities
The health problems of the students are looked after by Students’ Health Care Complex. Students are issued Health Diaries which serve the purpose of ID and medical record for them. For specialized treatments, the consultation of senior specialists is available from the renowned Sir Sunderlal Hospital attached to the Institute of Medical Sciences of the Banaras Hindu University. Emergency cases are dealt by BHU Trauma Center.

Library facilities
The Institute has one Main Library along with many Departmental Libraries. These libraries house more than 1,00,000 books and subscribe to a large number of scientific and technical journals. Online access to these journals is also possible. All the students are provided with text book bank facilities where a certain number of books are issued to them for the semester.[15] Apart from this, students also enjoy the access to the central library of Banaras Hindu University.

Academics
Undergraduate programme
IIT (BHU), Varanasi offers four year instructional programs for the degree of Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech) and Bachelor of Pharmacy (B.Pharm). Five year programs are categorized into the Integrated Dual Degree (IDD) program and Integrated master's degree (IMD) program. The IDD programme offers combined B.Tech and M.Tech or alternatively B.Pharm and M.Pharm degrees. Admission to all programs is expressly through the Joint Entrance Examination conducted by the Indian Institutes of Technology.[16] Earlier half of the intake for Pharmaceutical sciences was through JEE and the other half through BHU-PMT .But after the college was converted into an IIT, intake for B.Pharm and the IDD in Pharmaceutical sciences is exclusively through Joint Entrance Exam.

Courses in the undergraduate programme[17]
Programme	Course
Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech)	Ceramic Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering and Mining Engineering.
Bachelor of Pharmaceutics (B.Pharm)	Pharmaceutical Sciences
Integrated Dual Degree (B.Tech and M.Tech)	Biochemical Engineering, Bioengineering with M. Tech in Biomedical Technology, Ceramic Engineering, Civil Engineering with M. Tech in Structural Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering with M. Tech in Power Electronics, Materials Science and Technology, Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering and Mining Engineering.
Integrated Dual Degree (B.Pharm and M.Pharm)	Pharmaceutical Sciences
Integrated master's degree (M.Tech)	Engineering Physics, Industrial Chemistry and Mathematics and Computing.
An academic year is divided into two semesters each of twenty weeks duration. Each theory and laboratory course have credits assigned to it depending on the number of lectures and laboratory contact hours, tutorial hours and self study hours in a week. A seven-point letter grade (from A* to F each with a specified number of grade points) is awarded in each course. Performance is evaluated on the basis of the number of credits earned and also by the weighted grade point average earned for a course.

Postgraduate programmes[edit]
Postgraduate courses offer Master of Technology (M.Tech) and Ph.D. degrees. Admissions to the M. Tech programme are made through the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) conducted jointly by Indian Institute of Science and Indian Institutes of Technology.[18]

M.Tech. in Ceramic Engineering
M.Tech. in Chemical Engineering
M.Tech. in Civil Engineering (Hydraulics and Water Resources Engg., Geotechnical Engineering, Structural Engineering, Environmental Engineering and Transportation Engineering)
M.Tech. in Electrical Engineering (Power Systems, Electrical Machines and Drives, Control Systems and Power Electronics)
M.Tech. in Electronics Engineering (Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques and Instrumentation, Microelectronics and Communication Systems Engineering)
M.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering (Machine Design, Heat Power Engineering and Production Engineering)
M.Tech. in Metallurgical Engineering (Extractive Metallurgy, Metals and Materials Processing, Alloy Technology)
M.Tech. in Mining Engineering (Mine Environment, Rock Mechanics and Mine Planning)
M.Tech. in Systems Engineering
M.Tech. in Biochemical Engineering
M.Tech. in Industrial Management
M.Tech. in Biomedical Engineering
M.Tech. in Materials Science & Tech.
M.Pharm. in Pharmaceutical Sciences (Pharmaceutics, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Pharmacology and Pharmacognosy)
Admission[edit]
Admission for undergraduate students is through Indian Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Examination (IIT-JEE) for undergraduate courses and Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) for postgraduate courses.
From 2013 admission to undergraduate programs will be based on two tier test called (1) JEE (Mains) and (2) JEE (Advanced).[19] In addition the students qualifying through JEE (Advanced) test need to be in the top 20 percentile of the respective categories and/or have secured 75% or above in the qualifying exam conducted by the boards of their respective state/UT.

Departments[edit]

Department of Chemical Engineering at IIT (BHU)
The academic departments at IIT (BHU), Varanasi are:

Engineering	Science	Inter Disciplinary	Humanities
Ceramic Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Computer Science & Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Electronics Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Mining Engineering
Pharmaceutics
Chemistry
Mathematics
Physics
Biochemical Engineering
Biomedical Engineering
Material Science and Technology
History
Philosophy
Sociology
English and Computational Linguistics
The departments of Metallurgical Engineering, Electronics Engineering, Mining Engineering and Chemical Engineering have been recognized as Centers of Advanced Studies (CAS) by the University Grants Commission (UGC) of India. The Department of Metallurgical Engineering was the first engineering department in India to be thus recognized. The departments are supported under the FIST, SAP and DST schemes of the Government of India.

Student Life[edit]
IIT (BHU), Varanasi provides on-campus housing to students, research scholars and faculty members. Students are accommodated in the seventeen on-campus hostels. There are twelve hostels for male students, four for females and one for married couples.

Students' Gymkhana
The Students' Gymkhana manages all student activities at the campus thorough its executive and non-executive wings, the Gymkhana councils and the Students' Parliament respectively. The Director of the Institute is the patron of the Gymkhana while the Dean of Student Affairs (DoSA) acts as the ex-officio President of the Gymkhana. The Gymkhana consists of 4 Councils namely, the Cultural Council, the Science and Technology Council, the Film and Media Council and the Sports Council. Each council is headed by a General Secretary and 2 Joint General Secretaries elected by the Councils as well as a faculty member serving as the Counsellor.

Cultural Council	Science and Technology Council	Film and Media Council	Games and Sports Council
Dance Club
Theater Club
Literary Club
Quiz Club
Western Music Club
Indian Music Club
Fine Arts Club
Aero-modelling Club
Astronomy Club
Green Club
Club of Programmers
Robotics Club
Technical and Rural Outreach Club
Society of Automotive Engineers
Club of Economics and Finance
Media Club
Design Club
Outreach Club
Photography Club
Animation Club
Cine Club
Football
Cricket
Badminton
Volleyball
Basketball
Students' Parliament
The Parliament is a non-executive body consisting of various committees that overlook matters affecting student life at the campus. The inaugural elections of the Student Parliament were held on 17 January 2015. The first elected parliament consisted of 66 representatives, from B.Tech, Integrated M.Tech, M.Tech and PhD. courses. The parliament is headed by the Dean of Student Affairs as the ex-officio President of Students' Gymkhana with students elected by the Parliament serving as Vice-President and Assistant Vice-President. The standing sub-committees of the Parliament consist of:

Parliamentary Affairs Committee
Finance Committee
Emergency Committee
Festivals Committee
Nominations Committee
Hostel Affairs & General Welfare Committee
Security Committee
Training & Placement Committee
Web Management Committee
UG Academic Affairs Committee
PG Academic Affairs Committee
Alumni Relations Committee
Grievance Redressal & Enquiries Committee
Festivals
Technex is the annual technical festival. It has footsteps dating back to 1939. It brings together students from all over the country to participate in the celebration to exploit their knowledge and creative extravagance along with experts from the fields of both academia and industry. While events may vary from year to year, generally they include or are based upon software development, model exhibition, paper and poster presentation, astronomy, robotics and general awareness.

Kashiyatra or KY is the annual social and cultural festival. Started in 1982, it has been named Sparsh and Spandan in the past. It is a 3-day long extravaganza blending the disciplines of music, literature and arts into a fest of gargantuan proportions. Over the years, Kashiyatra has grown to become one of the biggest galas of North India with a footfall of 25,000+ college students spanning the entire nation. It's events consist of Dramatics, Dance, Indian and Western Music, Literary events, Quizzes, Fine Arts and Fashion Show. A plethora of informal events coupled with the competitions consumes your day while we leave the nights for the dazzling pro-nites to get you in the groove.

Spardha is the annual sports meet in which over 3500 competitors from close to 80 colleges take part. Events include athletics events and games such as cricket, football, hockey, basketball, volleyball, tennis, badminton and kabaddi.

FMC Weekend is the photography, film, media and digital arts festival organised by the Film and Media Council. The inaugural edition took place in 2014.

Various Intra-IIT Events, also called IIT Open, are also organized separately by various clubs. They include Manthan (First year Inter-Branch) (hitherto known as Fachcha Event), Jhankaar (Dance Club, Western Music Club and Indian Music Club), Kshitij (Theatre Club), Rhetorica (Lit Club and Quiz Club), etc.

Departmental fests
Almost every Department of IIT (BHU), Varanasi organizes a fest of its own in order to promote practical application of classroom knowledge and to bring together students of same branch from different colleges all over India. Some of these fests are internationally acknowledged and attract participation from Europe and US as well.

Ceramic Engineering : Keramos
Chemical Engineering : Udbhav
Civil Engineering : Shilp
Computer Science and Engineering : Codefest
Electrical Engineering : Prastuti
Electronics Engineering : Udyam
Engineering Physics: Jigyasa
Mechanical Engineering : COMET
Metallurgical Engineering : Anveshan
Mining Engineering : Mettle
Pharmaceutical Engineering : Spirit
Kashi Utkarsh
Kashi Utkarsh is a student-run, non-profit organization working for the upliftment of the deprived sections of the society. Its activities are mainly concentrated in several villages and localities surrounding Varanasi - Lehartara, Bajardiha and Kakarmatta.

Achievements and Activities undertaken:

Annual Blood Donation camps
Organizing medical camps in villages.
Helping under-privileged kids with secondary and higher education.
MCII and Entrepreneurship Cell[edit]
Malaviya Centre for Innovation, Incubation and Entrepreneurship (MCIIE) was established in 2008. The objective of the MCIIE is to produce successful firms that will leave the program financially viable. Incubator tenants not only benefit from business and technical assistance, they also benefit from official affiliation with the incubator, a supportive community with an entrepreneurial environment, direct link to entrepreneurs, and immediate networking and commercial opportunities with other tenant firms.[20] Programmes under MCIIE include:

Open Learning Programme in Entrepreneurship (OLPE)
Entrepreneurship Development and Awareness Programs
Technology Business Incubator (TBI) sponsored by National Science and Technology Entrepreneurship Development Board, DST, New Delhi.
MCIIE has some established startups incubated there like Internlelo,[21] Bridgedots(www.bridgedots.com) etc.

Rankings
Institute rankings
Engineering – India
NIRF	14
India Today[24]	6
Outlook India[25]	6
Dataquest[26]	4
Business – India
IIT (BHU) Varanasi was ranked 6th in Outlook India's Top Engineering Colleges of 2015.[27] Dataquest's Technology School 2015 ranking placed it at 4th position.[28] In India Today's Best Engineering colleges of 2016 it has been placed at 6th position.[29] IIT (BHU), Varanasi is ranked 14 in National Institutional Ranking Framework published by Ministry of Human Resource Development in April 2016.

Alumni
IITBHU Global Alumni Association (IBGAA)
The IITBHU Global Alumni Association (IBGAA) is the official alumni association with Chapters present all over the world. It is the largest alumni association among all of the IIT's. It brings together the alumni, students and faculty of IIT (BHU) to come up with projects for the improvement of the institute which can then be implemented collaboratively. Some of the projects by the Association include Wi-Fi connectivity on the campus, a lecture theatre for the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, an alumni guest house, and a girls’ hostel.

The IIT (BHU) Chronicle is a monthly e-magazine published by the IITBHU Global Alumni Association. It was first published in May 2005.[30] It provides an account of events at the institute as well as notable achievements of members of the alumni community. It also publishes news and articles, sourced from a number of published sources, stating recent developments around the world. The magazine is published around the 25th of each month. It is emailed to over 11,000 alumni, students and faculty of the institute.[31]

IIT BHU Notable Alumni
The Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi has had numerous notable alumni.